The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Ice Queen, by Ernest Ingersoll


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

The early dusk of a December day was fast changing into darkness as
three of the young people with whose adventures this story is
concerned trudged briskly homeward.

The day was a bright one, and Aleck, the oldest, who was a skilled
workman in the brass foundry, although scarcely eighteen years of age,
had given himself a half-holiday in order to take Kate and The
Youngster on a long skating expedition down to the lighthouse. Kate
was his sister, two years younger than he, and The Youngster was a
brother whose twelfth birthday this was.

The little fellow never had had so much fun in one afternoon, he
thought, and maintained stoutly that he scarcely felt tired at all.
The ice had been in splendid condition, the day calm, but cloudy, so
that their eyes had not ached, and they had been able to go far out
upon the solidly frozen surface of the lake.

"How far do you think we have skated to-day, Aleck?" asked The
Youngster.

"It's four miles from the lower bridge to the lighthouse," spoke up
Kate, before Aleck could reply, "and four back. That makes eight
miles, to begin with."

"Yes," said Aleck, "and on top of that you must put--let me see--I
should think, counting all our twists and turns, fully ten miles more.
We were almost abreast of Stony Point when we were farthest out, and
they say that's five miles long."

"Altogether, then, we skated about eighteen miles."

"Right, my boy; your arithmetic is your strong point."

"Well, _I_ should say his feet were his strong point to-day," Kate
exclaimed, in admiration of her brother's hardihood.

"It wasn't a bad day's work for a _girl_ I know of, either," remarked
Aleck, as he took the key from his pocket and opened the door of their
house, which was soon bright with lamplight and a crackling fire of
oak and hickory.

The house these three dwelt in was a small cottage in an obscure
street of the village, but it was warm and tight. Kate was
housekeeper, and The Youngster--whose real name was James, contracted
first into Jim, and then into Jimkin--was man-of-all-work, and
maid-of-all-work too, sometimes, when Kate needed his help.

While these two are getting tea, and Aleck is carefully wiping the
skates and putting them away where no rust can have a chance at the
blades, or mice gnaw the straps, let me tell you a few things about
the family.

Jim could remember his father only vaguely, but Kate and Aleck could
tell us all about him. His name was Kincaid, and he was a
master-builder of houses. He had bought and fitted up the cottage, and
had put savings in the bank, though Mrs. Kincaid was sick much of the
time, so that money was spent that would have been laid by "for a
rainy day" if she had been strong and well.

Unfortunately, the rain came sooner than any one thought for. One day,
about five years before the beginning of our little history, papa was
brought home hurt by falling from a scaffold at the top of a house. He
was not dead, and all thought he would be well again in a few weeks at
most; but instead he grew slowly worse, and after a time died.

Then the poor mother, always weak, did the best she could, and Kate
tried to help her, while Aleck stopped his school-going, and went to
work in the brass foundry. At first, though, he could earn but a
little, and Mr. Kincaid's savings slowly melted away until almost
nothing was left. Then the tired and desolate mother, never strong,
bade her children that long farewell that seems so terribly hopeless
to all of us when we are young, and the three "mitherless bairns" were
thrown upon their own resources.

The question arose as to what they should do. Jim was now eight years
old, and going to school. Kate had not neglected to do some studying,
and a great deal of reading, too, though she had always been so busy;
and a few weeks before her mother's death she had begun to study
regularly with a lady who lived near, whom Katy repaid by picking
various small fruits as they matured in the lady's large garden.
Aleck, as I have said, was working steadily, and getting enough wages
to keep them all in fair comfort, since they owned the house and
enough garden to give them plenty of vegetables. So, after talking the
prospect over, they decided to stay in their little house and live
together. A letter was written to Uncle Andrew, in Cleveland, who had
offered Kate and Jimmy a home, telling him they would try it alone a
while before burdening any of their friends.

This decision had been made almost four years before my story opens,
and it had not been regretted. They had even saved some money, but the
larger part of this had been spent in repairing the house, and in
fitting up a new boat for Jim and one of his friends, who thought they
knew a way to make a little money in the summer vacation if they had a
good boat. This boat had been completed only in time to prove how
good it was, before the winter had closed the river with ice at an
unusually early date, and now the pretty craft was safely stored in a
warehouse at the schooner-landing, a mile below the town.

All slept very soundly after their skating holiday--even Rex, the
great Newfoundland dog, who was a member of the family by no means to
be overlooked; but their ears were not stopped so tight that the
clangor of the church bells about midnight failed to arouse them with
its dreadful alarm of fire. Hastening to an upper window, one glance
at the blaze-reddened heavens showed our friends that the group of
factories in the southern part of the town was burning, and one of
these was the brass foundry where Aleck worked.

Aleck hurried away, and they did not see him until after sunrise, when
he came home tired, wet, and soot-blackened. The whole shop had burned
to the ground, he reported, and it was only by great risk and exertion
that he had been able to rescue his father's precious chest of tools.

"I didn't think," said the young man, as he sat wearily down to Katy's
hot coffee, "that my job would be so short when McAbee told me
yesterday I could work there 'as long as the foundry lasted.'"

During that day and the next Aleck tried every possible chance of
employment in the village, but found nothing; and by the time evening
came he had made up his mind that no regular employment equal to his
old place was to be had there for months to come.

There was no doubt about it. The time had arrived when they must avail
themselves of Uncle Andrew's kindness, and seek in his hospitable
house at least a temporary home.

"You see," said Aleck, "though I've about seventy-five dollars ahead,
yet when we have bought what we shall need, there will not be more
than forty dollars left. Now, if we go to Cleveland in the cars and
take our things with us, it'll cost us twenty-five dollars or more,
and leave us almost nothing to get started with there."

"S'posin'," said Jimkin the Wise, "s'posin' we don't go in the cars.
Cleveland's on the lake, and the lake's all ice; let's skate down to
uncle's!"

"Humph!" grunted Aleck.

"Pshaw!" said Kate.

"Didn't we skate eighteen miles yesterday, and couldn't we have gone
farther?" persisted Jim, unabashed.

"It's more than a hundred miles to Cleveland. Think you could do that
in one day? Besides, how would you know the way?"

"Didn't say I could do it in one day. But couldn't we go ashore and
stop at night? That's the way the Hall boys did, who skated up to
Detroit last winter."

"I read in the newspaper yesterday," said Kate, "that the lake was
frozen uncommonly hard, and was solid ice all the way along the shore
as far as the headlands of Ashtabula."

"If we could be sure of that," Aleck admitted, "there might be some
use in trying; but one can't be sure. Besides, how could we take along
our baggage?"

"Pull it on a sled," said Kate, "the way they do in the arctic
regions. Men up there just live on the ice, sleep at night and cook
their food and travel all day, and they don't have skates either.
Gracious! Who can that be?"

No wonder Katy was astonished, for there came echoing through the
house a noise as if somebody was pounding the wall down with a stone
maul. Aleck hastened to put a stop to it by opening the door.

He was greeted by the grinning face of a round-headed, chunky lad
nearly his own age, named Thucydides Montgomery; but as this was too
long a name for the Western people, it had been cut down very early in
life to "Tug," which everybody saw at once was the right word, on
account of the lad's strength and toughness. The mammas of the village
thought him a bad boy, getting their information from the small boys
of the public school, whom, in his great fondness for joking, he would
sometimes frighten and tease.

Aleck knew him better, and knew how brave and goodhearted he was. Jim
had good cause to be fond of him, for, in behalf of The Youngster,
during his first week at school, Tug had soundly thrashed a bullying
tyrant; while Kate gratefully remembered various heavy market-baskets
he had carried for her, since he lived near by. A closer tie between
our little family and their visitor, however, was the fact that, like
them, he was an orphan, and, like them, had relatives in Cleveland,
whom he had often thought he should like to be with better than
staying with his aunt here in Monore.

When Tug had joined the circle gathered before the big fireplace, and
had begun to talk about the brass-works, he was promptly hushed by
Aleck.

"Put that up now, and attend to me. This urchin here, who has become
very cheeky since he began to go to school--"

"And came under my care," Tug interrupted, loftily.

"Yes, no doubt. Well, The Youngster finds we all want to go to
Cleveland, but can't afford the railway fare, and so he coolly
proposes that we skate there."

"Well, why don't you do it? I'll go with you," said Tug, quietly.

Jim shouted with triumph. Kate laughed, and clapped her hands at the
fun of beating her big brother, and Aleck looked as though he thought
he was being quizzed.

"Do you mean it?" he asked.

"Of course I do. I want to go down as badly as you do. I haven't any
stamps, and the walking, I'm told, isn't good. I prefer to skate."

"Katy says we might drag our luggage on sleds, as they do in the
arctic regions; but supposing the ice should break up, or we should
come to a big crack?"

"I have read," Kate remarks again, "that they carry boats on their
sledges, and pack their goods in the boats, so that they will float if
the ice gives way."

"Take my boat!" screamed Jim, eagerly.

"That would call for a big sled."

"Well, didn't you two fellows build a pair of bobs last winter big
enough to carry that boat?"

"Doubtful," answered Aleck. But when they brought out the plan of the
boat, and then measured the bobs, which were stored in the woodshed,
they found them plenty wide, and Tug was sure they were sufficiently
strong.

Kate looked at them rather dubiously, and said she had never read of
arctic boats mounted on heavy bobs, but that they always seemed in the
pictures to have long, light runners under them; but Jim reminded her
curtly that "girls didn't know everything," so she kept still, and the
planning and talking went on.

Young people who are under no necessity to ask permission of older
persons, and, besides, are pushed by circumstances, decide quickly on
a plan which looks forward to adventure. Generally, I fear, they come
to grief, and learn some good lessons rather expensively; but
sometimes their energy and fearlessness carry them safely through what
the caution of old age would have stopped short of trying to perform.

They sat up pretty late discussing the plan, but before Tug went to
what he said he "s'posed he must call home," they had determined to
try it if the weather held firm.

This was on Friday. They hoped to get away early in the coming week.
Then all three went to bed, Jim jubilant, and looking forward to a
long frolic; Kate half doubtful whether it was best, but hopeful;
Aleck sure that, for himself, he didn't care, hating to put his sister
and brother to any risk, yet seeing no better way of resisting
poverty; Tug resolute, and bound to stand by his friends, whatever
happened. So they slept, and bright and early next morning the quiet
preparations began, Tug declining to answer any questions as to how he
arranged the matter of his going with his aunt.

The first thing was to settle upon their preparations.

"What will you want to take, Tug?"

"Precious little, I guess. Besides my clothing, which won't make much
of a bundle, I don't own much except my shot-gun, and my weasel-trap,
and my odds-and-ends chest, and some hooks and lines. I'm going to
sell all the rest of my duds."

"Who'll buy 'em?" asked Jim, doubtfully.

"Never you mind who, infant. 'This stock must be closed out below
cost,' as the old-clo' men say. I can put all my baggage in a
nail-keg."

"Then that's fixed," Aleck remarked. "Now for _you_, Katy?"

"I think the little trunk that was mamma's, and my handbag for brush
and comb and such things, will hold all that belongs to me--that is,
of my own _own_," she replied, laughing. "Of course, the cooking
things, and so on, belong to all of us."

"Well, Jim, your traps and mine will go into the other little chest, I
think--at any rate, they must. Now for the general list."

The general outfit was then talked over for more than an hour, when,
looking at his watch, Aleck said:

"Now this plan all depends on what luck I have in renting the house. I
heard yesterday that Mr. Porter (the owner of the burned factory)
would have to leave the hotel, and wanted to find a small furnished
house. I am going to see if I can't let ours to him."

So Aleck went off, and Tug and Jim started down to examine the boat,
study how much she would hold, and see what would be the best way of
mounting her upon the bobs, which they spoke of as "the sledge." They
were not back until afternoon, and found that Aleck had just come in,
full of success. Mr. Porter would rent the house, and would allow them
a closet in which to store all the small goods they wished to leave
behind.

"Now, what about the boat?" he asked, as he concluded the story.

"She'll do beautifully. Jim and I think we'd better deck her over from
the mast forward, and cover it with painted canvas, so as to make a
water-tight place to stow the provisions."

"That's a good idea."

"We thought you'd say so, and so we took exact measurements, and can
make a deck here, and fasten it on down there."

"All right; now, how do you think we'd better fasten the boat to the
sledge?"

"That's where we want you to help us decide. I don't believe its
weight is great enough to hold it firm."

"It's the first thing to be arranged," said Aleck, "and after dinner I
guess we'll have to go down to the wharf."

An hour later the three boys were standing beside the boat, gazing
first at it and then at the pair of strong bobs they had brought
along.

"We must take that coasting-board off the bobs and put in a heavy
reach-pole pretty near as long as the boat, that's certain," said Tug.

"And," spoke up Jimmy, "we've got to prop her up on the sledge so
she'll stand even, and won't tip."

"Yes, you're both right," Aleck agreed. "The best way is to saw chairs
out of two-inch plank which will just fit her bottom, and in which she
will sit solidly."

"But," Tug broke in, "that won't hold her firm in the racket she has
to go through. She must be bound down to that sledge, and I reckon the
best way is to draw bands of stout canvas--big straps would cost too
much--over the boat, from one side of the sledge to the other."

They examined and re-examined, but could none of them see any better
plan; so they measured, and on their way home bought enough of the
heaviest duck to make three bands, each three inches wide.

This transaction brought out a bit of Tug's loyalty. As Aleck took out
his purse to pay for the canvas, Tug pushed his hand away and laid a
dollar bill on the counter.

"You can just put up your cash," he cried. "This is my affair. If you
fellows furnish the boat and sledge and all the rest, I'm going to
pay, myself, for what new stuff we have to buy. It's little enough I
can do, anyhow."

With this view there was no use of arguing, and Tug had his way that
day and during all the rest of the preparation, spending the whole of
his savings and the money received from the sale of his books and
"contraptions."

While Tug sawed out the chairs, and screwed and spiked them firmly to
the sledge that evening, the other two boys worked at the bands, and
Katy sewed. They all sat in the kitchen, in order to be where Tug
could work, and before they went to bed both tasks were nearly done.

The next day was Sunday.

On Monday the sledge was finished, and the boat was set upon it.
Tacking tightly over it the canvas bands, two in front and one towards
the stern, the whole affair proved almost as stiff and firm as though
formed of one piece.

"What was the boat's name?" you may feel like interrupting me to ask.

It had not been christened yet, but when, as they sat by the fire on
Sunday evening, Katy read aloud the story of "Red Erik," they all
agreed that that was the name they wanted.

Now the _Red Erik_ was fitted to carry one mast, which passed through
a hole in the forward thwart, and was stepped into a block underneath.
The sail carried by this mast was a square sail of pretty good size,
supported by a gaff at the top and a boom at the bottom. When it was
not in use it was rolled around the mast, the gaff and boom being laid
lengthwise along with it; and by wrapping the sheet around, the whole
was lashed into a bundle, which lay very snugly upon the thwarts under
one gunwale, where a couple of leather gaskets were buckled about it
to keep it from sliding. There was also a jib-sail.

While they were overhauling this gear, the question of what they were
to do for a tent came up, and Katy asked whether the sails could not
be made useful for that purpose.

Certainly, the mainsail was large enough to form a very decent shelter
when stretched over a low ridge-pole, but it needed loops of rope at
the ends in order to be pegged to the ground and thus held in place.

"But there ain't any ground, and you can't drive wooden pegs into
ice," objected Katy, at this point of the planning.

"Then," said Aleck, "we shall have to get half a dozen iron pegs, and
I have some railway spikes that will be just the thing."

"That's so," said Tug. "Take 'em along. Now, the next thing is poles.
The gaff will do for one, but the other one we'll have to make,
because we want to use the boom for a ridge-pole."

"Then I'll tell you how we'll fix it," Aleck explained. "We'll put an
eye-bolt in the far end of the boom, and call that the front end of
the tent. We'll make a front upright post out of hickory, and have the
lower end of it shod with iron, so as to stick in the ice--"

"Hold up! I've a better idea than that even," Tug exclaimed. "I
suppose you want to save carrying any more timber than you can help.
Well, let's cut off the handle of the boat-hook--that's hickory--until
it is the right length, and its iron point will stick in the ice, or
the ground (if we set her up ashore) first-rate. Then we'll go to the
blacksmith, and have a cap made with a spike in it to go through the
eye in the end of the boom. When we want to use the boat-hook we can
take the cap off."

"That's a good way; but how about the gaff?"

"Set a short spike in the far end to stick in the ice, and let the
ridge-pole rest in the jaws of the gaff; the canvas will hold her
steady."

"Yes, I suppose so. You're an inventor, Tug. Go down to-morrow and get
the irons made."

Meanwhile, as I said, loops were sewed on the sail, and it was thus
arranged to serve as a tent. It had a queer shape when set up in the
yard on trial, for the sail was broader at one end than the other,
though it did very well indeed. An end piece was lacking; but this was
supplied by putting on tapes so as to tie the broad foot of the jib to
one edge of the rear of the tent, while the sharp top end was folded
around on the outside and tied to one of the side pegs. For the front
they could do no better than hang up a shawl or something of that
kind, if needed, since they decided that a few yards square of spare
canvas which they had must be kept for a carpet upon the ice floor.

This done, there remained to screw into the forward end of the sledge
two eye-bolts, to which the ropes were to be attached for dragging the
boat. Each of these ropes was about twelve feet long, and had at one
end an iron hook, so as to be put on and taken off very quickly. Three
of them were prepared, but, as you will see, it was rare that more
than two were ever in use at once on the march. They could easily be
hooked together into one long line, however; two of them would serve
as end-stays when the tent was set up; and they were often of the
greatest importance to the young adventurers, in enabling them to
overcome difficulties, or to extricate themselves from some perplexing
or dangerous situation.

All these arrangements, by hard work, were finished on Tuesday
evening, the very last task being the making of a box with
double-hinged covers, which should fit snugly under the stern-thwart.
This was to be the kitchen chest or mess kit, holding the cooking
utensils and dishes. When its two covers were spread out and propped
up it formed a low table.

Katy, meanwhile, had been looking after clothing and provisions. On
Tuesday evening, when Tug came in after tea, she was ready to read to
him a full list, as follows:

BOAT OUTFIT.--Sailing and rowing gear complete; one piece of spare
canvas three yards square; one oil lantern and a gallon of oil; one
compass; a locker under the stroke-thwart, containing calking-iron,
oakum, putty, copper nails, gimlet, screw-driver, screws, sail needle,
thread, wax, etc.

CAMP OUTFIT.--Tent (_made out of the sails_), pegs, poles, etc.; one
axe; one hatchet; one small handsaw; one shovel; one clothes-line; one
mess chest, containing the fewest possible dishes, tin cups, knives,
forks, etc., also a skillet, a coffee-pot, etc.; one iron kettle; one
covered copper pail.

PERSONAL BAGGAGE.--One trunk for Aleck's and Jim's clothing; one trunk
for Katy's clothing; Tug's box (_clothing, and what he says are
"contraptions"_); small valise for Katy's toilet necessaries and other
small articles.

BEDDING (_tied up in close rolls_).--For Aleck, three blankets and a
thick quilt.

For Jim, the same.

For Tug, three blankets and a piece of old sail-cloth.

For Katy, a buffalo-robe trimmed square, two flannel sheets, three
blankets, and a heavy shawl.

Thick woollen nightcaps or hoods for all.

FOOD (_enough to last two weeks, it is supposed, and consisting
chiefly of the first seven articles named_).--Corn-meal, coffee,
sugar, crackers, dried beef, bacon, and ham; also small quantities of
potatoes, beans, dried corn, tea, chocolate, maple sugar, buckwheat
flour, and condiments. (Katy did not count the luxuries of the first
day's evening meal.)

All these supplies, as far as possible, were put into bags made of
strong cloth or of heavy paper, or into wooden boxes, and then were
stowed under the forward deck. To carry them and the rest of the
luggage down to the wharf, a box was fastened upon Jim's hand-sled,
and several trips were made.

At last Wednesday afternoon came, and the preparations for the
adventurous journey were complete. All the morning had been spent by
Tug and Jim in packing away goods in the boat, while Aleck and Kate
finished the home-leaving, bringing down a final sled-load with them
about two o'clock. Besides this, Katy's arms were full of
"suspicious-looking" bundles, as Tug noticed, the contents of which
she refused to let any one know before night.

The boat lay hidden underneath the warehouse wharf, and of the few who
knew of their intentions nobody seemed to have let out the secret;
moreover, the day was unusually cold and somewhat windy, so that few
skaters were out, at least, so far down the river. Thus they were not
annoyed by inquisitive visitors. Ten minutes after Aleck and Kate
arrived the final package had been stowed, the mantle of canvas spread
over, the oars and rolled-up tent laid on top, and Tug announced
everything ready.

"Then let's be off," said Aleck, as he buckled the last strap of his
left skate, and stood up.

"Not till you give the word of command, Captain."

"Captain!" echoed Jim, standing very straight.

"Captain!" Kate caught up the word, and made a funny girlish imitation
of an officer's salute. "Not till you give the order, sir!"

"Oho!" laughed Aleck. "That's election by acclamation, I should say!
All right; only, if I'm to be Captain, remember you must do as I say
at once, and save any arguing about it until afterwards. When you get
tired you can vote me out as you voted me in. Will you agree?"

"Yes--agreed!" cried all three.

"Then my first order is 'Forward!'" and so saying he seized a
drag-rope and sent the sledge-boat spinning out upon the smooth ice
far from under the shadow of the wharf, showing how easily it could be
run in spite of its weight, which was not less than five hundred
pounds.

[Illustration: "A MOMENT LATER THEY WERE OFF."]

A moment later they were off on the first strokes of a trip that
proved far more eventful than any of them anticipated--Aleck with the
drag-rope, Tug by his side, Jim pulling his sled, Rex leaping and
barking, and Kate bringing up the rear with her hands on the
stern-rail of the boat. Two or three boys and men called after them,
and one followed a little way, but he was sent back with short
answers, and in a few moments the church spires, the big, bell-crowned
cupola of the High School, and the lofty spans of the railway bridge
had been left far behind. Not much was said, for even heedless Jim
felt that this was a serious undertaking, and the pleasant scenes they
had known so long might never be revisited.
